[Music]
here's a quick test think of an orange
what color is it okay that was too easy
let's try again think of an airliner is
the jet you imagined painted white and
no surprises there since most of them
are but I got to thinking why is that
well I'm a curious soul with a healthy
obsession of airplanes so I couldn't
just leave this question unanswered and
here's what I found
okay hang on I hear the hecklers in the
back I know not all planes are white yes
there are plenty of colorful ones for
example mango an airline that operates
in South Africa paints its planes bright
orange the Hungarian based Wizz Air has
planes that are partially painted bright
pink and purple hmm I woulda guessed
another color that rhymes with mellow
and there's always the Siberian carrier
s7 with their bright green plains but
these are more of a rare exception
the general rule goes like this you're
better off painting your aircraft white
now I bet your summer wardrobe has at
least a couple of white items be it a
t-shirt a pair of pants or a light tank
top the main reason people prefer white
on a hot day is it's uncanny ability to
reflect sunlight compare that to dark
colors that absorb sunlight and you
quickly understand why you feel like
you're boiling on a summer day while
wearing black so just like clothing
aircraft producers use white paint to
keep airplanes cool it minimizes the
heating as well as the potential harm
from solar radiation planes have some
parts made from plastic carbon fiber and
fiberglass those things in particular
need the most protection from the
Blazing Sun that's why all the control
surfaces of the plane along with the
nose cone should always be painted white
Concorde a French British supersonic
passenger airliner was covered with a
special extra reflective white paint
otherwise it wouldn't have withstood the
heat that generated when the plane flew
at such high speeds
twice the speed of sound meaning
Concord moved at a staggering 1355 miles
per hour when it was in use the next
reason for painting planes white is even
more practical like a lot of things it
comes down to money it's just cheaper to
have a white colored aircraft you see
all planes start out white when they're
made but what if an airline decides to
paint their say bright yellow well first
of all an additional layer of paint will
add more than a thousand pounds of
weight to the aircraft more weight means
more fuel burnt and that can get pricey
if you thought gas was expensive try
filling up a jumbo jet
besides the paint itself costs a pretty
penny too that is at least fifty
thousand dollars enough or two hundred
thousand to paint just one plane oh
that's a bit more than I was planning to
spend today and if you decide to sell
your plane one day it'll be way harder
for you to get rid of a bright yellow
flying machine than an ordinary white
one nobody wants to spend extra money
covering that up also if a plane has
some damage such as a crack dent or oil
spill the white background makes it much
easier to spot and repair the fault plus
if a crash happens and the aircraft goes
down oops that's out of sequence let's
try it again
if the aircraft goes down and a crash
happens yeah that's more better rescuers
will be able to locate a white plane
much faster
finally one 2011 study found that birds
don't fly into white or light colored
planes as often as they do with darker
ones okay so that answers my question
but why do they have to fly so high the
cruising altitude of most commercial
jets is about 35,000 feet whew don't
look down
now why can't they fly just high enough
to avoid crashing into tall things like
skyscrapers and mountains
turns out this altitude isn't some
randomly chosen number first the higher
you rise above the ground
thinner the air becomes it means that
aircraft face less resistance and burn
less fuel to fly through such thin
atmosphere granted there are models that
do better in the thicker air at lower
altitudes but I'm generalizing here
anyway planes have one more crucial
reason for flying so high and you'll
like this one
at higher altitudes there's no need to
worry about flying into a thunderstorm
or getting stuck in a cloud well just
kidding on that last bit but even though
planes can travel through clouds it
isn't a smooth ride because of
turbulence yes the dreaded T word often
sends passengers into a panic when they
feel it
no pilot or crew wants to deal with that
if they can avoid it the takeaway here
keep your seat belt fastened at all
times while the plane is in the air the
35,000 foot cruising altitude is also
much higher than most birds fly and
since a bird or two can bring an entire
plane down it's rare don't worry it's
still better to be safe than sorry
even if the plane comes out of the
winter there's still a lot of expensive
damage and last but not least if
something goes wrong during the flight
and the plane starts to plummet the
height will play the role of a safety
cushion such an altitude may by the
pilots necessary time to fix the problem
ok planes need to be really high up got
it but what about those holes in the
windows that's a little unsettling
especially when you find out and it's
called the bleed hole you well despite
the questionable name it's there for
your safety the aircraft cabin is
pressurized during the flight if it
wasn't you and everyone else including
the pilots would pass out as soon as the
plane got up to its cruising altitude
you ever wonder why they turn up the AC
and pump all that air into the cabin
it's a way to create the same air
pressure your body is used to on the
ground meanwhile the difference between
the pressure outside and inside the
cabin is so great that the inner
condensed air desperately struggles to
get out of the plane where it's a lot
roomier
enter the ominous hole the thing is
plain windows have three panes the first
one is the one you leave your
fingerprints on when you
curiously investigate what looks like
something that shouldn't be there mm-hmm
the second with the bleed hole in it is
in the middle and the outer takes all
the brunt of the pressure difference the
purpose of the tiny hole is to make sure
that the cabin pressure is applied only
to the outer pane also if something
happens to this third pane and it gets
smashed the middle layer will be able to
protect you from the lack of air
pressure outside so yet again nothing to
worry about aircraft engineers know what
they're doing and there's one more
question that seems to bother a lot of
people why don't our planes fly over the
North Pole it turns out that planes must
follow super strict rules when it comes
to their flight routes for example
commercial planes aren't allowed to fly
over Tibet due to the towering peaks of
the Himalayas but surely the planes
cruising altitude is higher than even
the tallest mountain in the world well
yeah but not by much Everest is just
over 29,000 feet tall it's only a 6,000
foot difference from the cruising
altitude a little too close for comfort
but that's not all
imagine this during a flight over the
Himalayas decompression occurs in the
cabin and all the passengers need to put
their oxygen masks on immediately within
a span of 15 to 20 minutes the plane
would need to descend to an altitude
where the passengers will be able to
breathe again the problem is there's a
bunch of mountains in the way all right
we're heading off course let's return to
the question of avoiding the Arctic
admittedly
there might be charter flights that will
deliver you to the North Pole
as for commercial airlines it's a big
no-no first a plane must always be
within sixty minutes of an airport where
it can land in case of an emergency now
this rule applies only the two-inch in
airplanes so big ones with three or four
engines can cross the Arctic
negative if a plane goes down and
crashes up there it'll be next to
impossible for survivors to endure such
harsh conditions for very long
not to mention pilots say flying close
to one of Earth's magnetic poles is a
nightmare since navigational equipment
tends to wig out not to mention you're
also getting into Santa's airspace and
he's keeping a list and checking it
twice
so you don't want to be naughty you want
to be nice so there anyway what's
something you've always wondered about
airplanes or aviation in general let me
know down in the comments if you learned
something new today
then give this video a like and share it
with a friend but hey don't go painting
your airplane yellow just yet
we have over 2,000 cool videos for you
to check out all you have to do is pick
the left or right video click on it and
enjoy stay on the bright side of life